Module 1: Introduction to Node.js

What is Node.js and why it was created
The V8 JavaScript engine
Node’s single-threaded, event-driven architecture
Node.js vs browser JavaScript
Installing Node.js (LTS version)
Running scripts from the terminal:
node app.js


Using Node REPL (Read–Eval–Print Loop)

Practice:

Run your first program:

console.log("Hello from Node.js!");

Module 2: Global Objects and Core Concepts

Goal: Learn Node’s global variables and the runtime environment.
Topics:

__dirname and __filename

require and module.exports

process object and process.argv

Using setTimeout(), setInterval(), and clearInterval()

Exiting the process (process.exit())

Practice:

Print current directory and file path.

Create a timer that logs “Running…” every 2 seconds.

Module 3: Modules and the Module System

Goal: Master modular code in Node.js.
Topics:

What are modules?

CommonJS module system

Creating your own module:

module.exports = function greet(name) {
  return `Hello ${name}`;
};


Importing custom modules with require()

Built-in core modules overview (fs, os, path, http, events, etc.)

Practice:

Create a module that exports multiple functions (e.g. add, subtract).

Import it into another file and test it.

Module 4: File System (fs module)

Goal: Read, write, and manage files using Node.
Topics:

Synchronous vs asynchronous methods

Reading files: fs.readFile() and fs.readFileSync()

Writing files: fs.writeFile() and fs.appendFile()

Deleting files: fs.unlink()

Creating and removing directories

Watching files with fs.watch()

Practice:

Create a text file and read its content.

Write user input (from terminal) into a file.

Module 5: Path and OS Modules

Goal: Work with file paths and system info.
Topics:

Using the path module (path.join(), path.basename(), etc.)

Using the os module:

System uptime

Memory info

Platform, hostname, CPU info

Practice:

Create a script that prints system info using os module.

Build a file path safely using path.join().

Module 6: Events and EventEmitter

Goal: Understand Node’s event-driven architecture.
Topics:

What is an event emitter?

Importing events module

Creating an event emitter instance

Listening (on) and emitting (emit) events

Passing data with events

Removing listeners

Practice:

Create an event emitter that logs a message when a “start” event is emitted.

Emit an event when a file operation completes.

Module 7: Buffers and Streams

Goal: Learn how Node handles binary data and data flow.
Topics:

What are Buffers and why they exist

Creating a buffer from a string or array

Writing to and reading from buffers

What are Streams (Readable, Writable, Duplex, Transform)

Reading and writing files using streams

Piping data between streams (readable.pipe(writable))

Practice:

Copy the contents of one file to another using streams.

Read a large text file with a readable stream and log chunks.

Module 8: Creating HTTP Servers (Core http Module)

Goal: Build a simple web server from scratch (no Express).
Topics:

Importing and using the http module

Creating an HTTP server

Handling requests and sending responses

Understanding request and response objects

Writing headers (res.writeHead())

Returning HTML and JSON responses

Routing manually using req.url

Practice:

Create a simple server that returns:

“Home Page” for /

“About Page” for /about

404 for unknown routes

Module 9: Working with the URL Module

Goal: Parse and handle URL data.
Topics:

Using the url module to parse URLs

Extracting query parameters

Combining URL and http module for routing logic

Practice:

Create a server that displays query parameters (e.g., /greet?name=John → “Hello John”).

Module 10: Asynchronous Programming in Node

Goal: Understand how Node handles asynchronous tasks.
Topics:

Callbacks

Promises and async/await

Using util.promisify() to convert callback functions

Event loop overview

Microtasks vs macrotasks

Practice:

Rewrite file system operations using Promises and async/await.

Log the execution order to understand event loop behavior.

Module 11: CLI (Command Line Interface) Apps

Goal: Create Node-based command-line tools.
Topics:

Using process.argv for command-line arguments

Reading user input with readline module

Using chalk (optional) for colorful CLI output

Building and packaging CLI tools

Practice:

Create a command-line “note taker” app that saves text into a file.

Add a “read” and “delete” feature for saved notes.

Module 12: Child Processes

Goal: Run and manage system commands from Node.
Topics:

child_process module overview

Using exec() and spawn()

Handling output and errors

Creating background tasks

Practice:

Create a script that runs a shell command (e.g., dir or ls).

Log the output to the console.

Module 13: Error Handling and Debugging

Goal: Write stable, bug-free Node programs.
Topics:

Handling synchronous and asynchronous errors

Using try...catch and error events

Emitting custom errors

Debugging with Node’s built-in debugger (node inspect)

Logging with console and process.stderr

Practice:

Simulate a file read error and handle it gracefully.

Use try...catch to handle invalid JSON input.

Module 14: File Upload and Streams (Intermediate)

Goal: Handle raw incoming data (e.g., uploads).
Topics:

Handling POST requests manually (no Express)

Reading incoming data with streams (req.on('data'))

Writing data to a file (fs.createWriteStream)

Understanding multipart/form-data basics

Practice:

Build a raw file upload handler that saves incoming data to disk.

Module 15: Node.js Best Practices

Goal: Write cleaner and more efficient Node programs.
Topics:

Organizing code with modules and folders

Avoiding callback hell

Using Promises and async functions effectively

Environment variables and process.env

Graceful shutdown of servers

Practice:

Refactor a large script into multiple modules.

Use async/await everywhere possible.

✅ Final Project: Build a Basic Node.js Web Server (No Express)

Goal: Combine everything you’ve learned.
Requirements:

Use http module to handle routes: /, /about, /api/users

Serve a static HTML file for /

Serve JSON data for /api/users

Handle 404 pages

Log each request using the fs module (access logs)

Handle errors gracefully